the land of Britain was once considered
a myth by the mighty Roman Empire to them
it was nothing more than an old Legend
This would change in the year 55 BC when
Julius Caesar set his sights on this
fabled island and sailed towards its
Shores the historical Discovery would
end in [Music] defeat almost a century
later the Romans Found Glory when Roman
Emperor Claudius stepped foot on British
they set their eyes on Stonehenge using the sacred
site for their worship and rituals londinium was
established and the Romans seized control of the
land but what happened next in the history of
the United Kingdom to understand this fascinating
land we must start from the very beginning [Music]
what would become the United Kingdom began way
back within the prehistoric Paleolithic period
which dates back to 950,000 years ago a time that
the earliest evidence of an ancient civilization
dates back to the first settlers that arrived
in Britain were hunter gatherers who traveled
from Europe around 8,000 BC and are now known as
the first [Music] Britains this group of people
showed one of the earliest forms of economy with
the hunters trading native elk wild cattle and
pigs while defending themselves from wolves
and bears which were Rife in Britain at that
time over the years people have discovered a
large quantity of tools such as carved Stone
edges and hand axes it is incredibly rare to
find human remains from this period which has
made it difficult for experts to determine
which form of hominids were living there at
any particular time with that being said the
tools that have been found give evidence that
they were probably a subgroup of homo erectus
like a species known as homo hle bensis trying
to follow the movements of the homo erectus is
also very difficult with the early sites that
have been discovered being divided by many years
spread out around Europe making pattern forming
difficult at one time Britain was part of the
European Mainland and not the island we know
today this made it incredibly easy for groups
to spread and relocate to other parts of the
land mass as the land moved and water levels Rose
groups were cut off and were left to evolve these
early inhabitants relied heavily on both hunting
and scavening ing which have been proven by the
wooden Spears discovered in Essex which are
believed to have been crafted around 450,000
years [Music] ago it is often the stone tools that
survive so finding wooden remains is an incredibly
rare and valuable find in terms of the information
they provide the hand axes would often get worn
down over the years with Flint flakes chipping off
them it is these flakes that give archaeologists
a trove of information especially when they can
trace the technique of making them the complexity
of the tool and the type of stone used in fact
hand axes were not used to chop down wood but were
more likely a way of cutting up animal carcasses
for eating because of the Simplicity of the tool
and the expertise of the hunters after creating
several of them they've been discovered in high
volume at some ancient sites this proves
that groups often return to certain plac
es and that they chose not to carry the tools with
them as they traveled instead making new ones on
arrival as the techniques in tool making Advanced
the Neanderthals of Britain began strategizing
with their weapons to hunt larger prey like wooly
rhinos or mammoths that once called Britain their
home the next phase in the prehistoric period
is known as the upper Paleolithic Era which
saw humans physically evolve into what we are
today with only a few elements of our ancient
ancestors still surviving in one form or another
this is why we still have wisdom teeth which were
once crucial for eating raw food at this time
Europe would have been an incredibly harsh and
cold place to live as a result of the last ice age
this led to many inhabitants leaving at certain
times when the climate dropped to ensure their
survival this was not only to prevent freezing
to death but to ensure that they were able to
find plenty of vegetation and animal prey all
year round Limestone Gorges also offered shelter
to people living in Britain around this time with
deep caves and overhangs being invaluable places
to set up camp around 11,300 years ago Britain
began to warm up which began a substantial phase
of growth which saw Birch and pine trees flourish
as well as other forms of greenery other forms of
Woodland also spread across the land including Oak
Hazel lime and Elm which are still in abundance
to this day particular animals that remained after
the colder climate changed such as reindeer and
horses drawing Hunters that were accustomed to
tracking and killing the animals this led to many
of them traveling across Europe and settling in
Britain as the climate continued to warm up many
of the inhabitants had to change their prey to
Red deep deer and boar as other animal species
migrated or died out this change of prey forced
humans to evolve their tools and technology in
order to survive around 6,300 years ago during
the Mesolithic period many groups began setting
up winter and summer camps which allowed them to
live in an ideal environment that catered to their
needs when the natural climate change through the
seasons sticking to one place would use up all
their food and resources such as wood for making
fires without these things they would perish
spending time in another location meant that
the local habitat could repopulate again which
humans could hunt once they returned Coastal
sites were often chosen for certain times of
the year which meant that humans began eating a
heavy seab based diet which mostly consisted of
fish and mollusk this also helped develop tools
that could be used to help catch water-based prey
further expanding their knowledge and curiosity
about the ocean the transition from hunting and
Gathering came about around 4,100 BC which was
aided by the arrival of agricultural techniques
that came from the East this was propelled by the
population boom seen during the late Mesolithic
period which meant that the animal resources they
previously relied on were depleting fast the
British landscape began to change soon after
with the inhabitants making Mass Flint tools which
were equipped with wooden handles these were used
to clear the land so that Fields pastures and
settlements could be created barley and emmer
were the first main crops grown for a vegetative
food source while pigs and cattle were captured in
bread so that they could generate their own meat
sources rather than kill them straight away for
food this shift to building a self-efficient
settlement saw the first domestic buildings
which included large narrow wooden buildings
known as long houses another form of domestic
building were structures for the dead to be
stored and respected known as long barrows the
Neolithic period introduced several huge changes
to Britain especially when it came to technology
landscape and settlements the caway inclosure
became popular at this time which were circular
monuments built up Banks and ditches forming a
ring around the settlement structures known as
curses were often built within the circular banks
with the longest enclosure ever discovered in
Britain measuring an incredible 10 km which
is around 33,000 ft when it came to hunting
the way that settlers created arrowe heads
evolved with the design appearing more like a
leaf shape to Aid its aerodynamics these later
changed to Chisel and transverse arrowe heads
to further improve their craft this was a result
of social changes which were no doubt influenced
by different groups mixing that shared their
crafting expertise the Chisel Arrow Head was
easier to use which could be glued or bound
to an arrow shaft which made production far
quicker during the middle of the Neolithic
period the British settlers began to slow
down when it came to wild animal hunting
instead depending on their own livestock
afterward arrowheads became less sharpened as
they were used as a deterrent against other
settlements stealing livestock rather than
killing the thief the reason for this could
have been down to Rising social pressures
that forbid murder as a punishment for any
Injustice between 2600 and 2200 BC monuments known
as henges were erected one of which being the
famous Stonehenge found in Wiltshire England while
there is no definitive proof it is believed that
the henges were used for rituals and astronomical
observation because the ditches are located inside
of the banks experts have concluded that it wasn't
used as a form of Defense but rather as a symbol
of Defense during the later Neolithic period
pottery and tools began to change during the early
Neolithic era Pottery was often round bottom bowls
with necks that slop down by the late Neolithic
the style changed to flat-based pots that were
decorated by etches made during the drying
process these early pots were primarily used to
brew and store beer although dairy products and
stews were also contained in them with groups
Gathering and Technology quickly advancing for
the prehistoric people of Britain it was time
to move into the next critical era for their
advancement the Bronze Age the arrival of
metal and Beaker style pots represents the
change in Britain ushering in the Bronze Age
of the country that began in 2200 BC [Music]
[Music] bronze alloy was actually much rarer
than iron ore which meant that the resource was
reserved for tools white gold was primarily
used to create jewelry the other alloy used
by people during the Bronze Age was tin which
was also quite scarce in Europe because bronze
can be cast at a much lower temperature than
copper it meant that bronze casters could use
molds to create more elaborate designs such
as daggers H Birds and axes which were far
more durable than the stone tools that came
before them bronze is also much harder than
copper as the tin within it reinforces it on
an atomic level Beaker pots were still used
after bronze was utilized with their different
designs decorations and refinements improving as
time went on in fact intact beakers and pots that
were used in the burials give an insight into the
craftsmanship which sometimes still has honey
residue in them from the the beer they drank
daggers were made longer during the middle of
the Bronze Age which became the first swords
made in Britain which were called rape years
as social tensions grew between the different
groups of people more variations of weapons
and shields were made there is even evidence
that neighboring settlements could have used
the weapons heavily by the damage sustained to
them although they could have been intentionally
damaged before being placed in hordes to prevent
anyone else from using the sords against them
while there is evidence of human remains being
cremated in the Bronze Age it's likely that
much of the remains were scattered or placed
in moving water this is evident from the lack
of bones found within burial sites where more
bodies should have been located this shows how
the people of this time mastered fire and ways
of increasing its heat to successfully burn
human remains and cast metal it was during
the the bronze Agee that boundaries around land
started appearing which were traded and claimed by
dominant families livestock pens and agricultural
Fields became an important part of everyday life
as well as the copper mines that provided jobs
for inhabitants and allowed metal work to advance
at a very Swift Pace a historically important
site was discovered at Great orm inland did
know whales that provided 90% of the ore used
to create axes all around the northwest of
Europe from 1,000 BC another change in climate
resulted in many areas of Britain becoming
uninhabitable mostly due to the lack of crop
growth in the cold conditions also areas that
were once ideal for growing vegetation became
wet and boggy with the eruption of the hecka
volcano and Iceland blocking out much of the
sunlight with the land becoming inhospital
able many settlers moved on from the land
While others repurposed the fields for
strictly raising livestock those who refused
to leave were forced to build walkways and
raised settlements over the Wetland beneath
which inadvertently improved their structure
building skills the most preserved examples of
cloth food contained in pots tools furniture and
wooden objects were discovered within the F below
these settlements as they would have dropped down
or fell in after a structure was attacked and
broken down because of the lack of oxygen and
muddy conditions of the bogs these items were
preserved for Millennia near the end of the
Bronze Age the long pointed Rapier blades evolved
into long flat blades with a Full Tang going into
a cast handle now weapons were not only becoming
an art form for the people of the Bronze Age but
a necessity for their survival hordes of weapons
became rarer in the Bronze Age which is believed
to have been a result of its value dropping this
led to crafter known as Founders to hold back
their Wares in order to raise its value this is
the first example of Market strategy in British
history which later became an incredibly
important factor in its economic growth
[Music]
the Iron Age began around 1200 BC in the
Middle East and southeast of Europe which
is best known for the extensive Iron and
Steel crafting that took place while it
was rare there were some settlers who were
dabbling with the smelting of iron during
the end of the Bronze Age although it wasn't
until the Iron Age that the craft skyrocketed
around Europe the Iron Age was vital to
the advancement of the human race as it
helped speed up civilization growth provide
more resilient and permanent settlements and
opened up more possibilities when it came
to crafting tools and creating Weaponry that
kept up with the advancement of other groups
spread around Europe who could pose a threat
because steel is much stronger than bronze
and lasted longer it improved the creation
of tools these tools were also developed for
agricultural use which further established long
lasting settlements around Britain it wasn't
just tools and weaponry that saw an evolution
as art farming techniques religious beliefs and
alphabetic writings started to rise in Britain
the European Iron Age started in the Mediterranean
region and move towards the center of Europe as
the years went by in 600 BC the skills in Iron
crafting spread to the northern part of the
continent the early Iron Age was dominated by
a group called the hallat Chiefs who were the
elite and most powerful of the age it was within
this culture that saw the first fortified Hill
forts with domesticated animals and livestock
raised on their land these would later become
castles and palaces which were not only
a form of Defense but a way to boost the
wealth of their family in 450 BC however the
hallad culture crumbled and the Chiefs lost
their power this led to other groups rising
to power in Europe including the means Greeks
atrans Romans and Kelts who used their iron in
steel manufacturing to craft durable weapons
and advanced armor out of all of these groups it
was the Kelts that became the most powerful the
Kelts were broken up into different tribes
that were spread throughout Britain despite
being Advanced enough to share a common language
they were named after keltoi which was the Greek
word for barbarians the Celtic culture began to
rise as early as 1200 BC with the group spreading
throughout Britain Ireland France and Spain as
their population grew and moved around although
they stayed mostly in Britain and Ireland with
some of their vocabularies still existing in
modern-day language while they were around for a
considerable amount of time during the Iron Age
it wasn't until around 700 BC that they were
documented in history by the Romans who called
them gy another word meaning barbarians
despite their name the Kelts were among the
most successful people in British history with
them controlling many parts of the continent
which include current day Ireland while the Kelts
thrived for centuries when the Roman empire grew
and spread across Europe Julius Caesar launched
an allout attack on the Kels slaying thousands
and crushing their settlements and culture to
claim their territories Caesar's Roman army later
tried to invade Britain but they failed allowing
the Kelts to populate the land but when it comes
to the Romans involvement in the history of
Britain their story was only just beginning
[Applause] [Music] [Applause] [Music]
as the Roman Empire continued to grow they
eventually took control of most of Britain
before then the Empire had dominated
the Mediterranean Sea they successfully
stormed the ancient cities of Carthage and
Macedon before taking control of Egypt and
Syria after traveling through the Alps they
eventually reached albian which was the original
name for Britain by the time the Romans arrived
the Iron Age settlements had Advanced further
having thriving agriculture wooden structures
and large communities trading routes had also
been established between the Britain and
the people of Gaul who lived in what we now
know today as France and Belgium here wine and
the first forms of currency were traded while
Julius Caesar failed to take full control
over the island he returned in the Years 55
54 BC out of stubbornness and his interest in
taking control of the trading that was going
on Caesar planned on disrupting the belga trade
routes in the English Channel and believed that
the Britains were going to help their friends
across the sea as a response to the hospitality
this made the people of Britain enemies of the
Roman Empire Caesar managed to persuade the Roman
senate to support his invasion of Britain telling
them the land was rich and silver a claim that he
had no proof for before its Discovery Britain was
hidden away and had gone undetected by the Romans
in fact many people in the Empire thought that the
island of albian was a myth a legend that told of
barbaric groups who were involved in a practice
that disgusted the Romans to their core they
drank milk from animals Caesar's plan to invade
and take control of Britain didn't go down well
with the Romans having to retreat to avoid being
defeated undeterred he returned with five Legions
which allowed him to storm across the Thames river
and he managed to speak with the chieftain of the
Britains Castle Lanas this meeting resulted in a
peie treaty with Caesar returning to the mainland
of Europe to deal with a rebellion breaking out
and a failed Harvest that threatened starvation
Caesar never returned to Britain and after
a Civil War the Republic crumbled under the
rulership of the Emperors Augustus and Caligula
who continued to grow their empire in Gaul their
eyes once again set upon the barbarians across
the channel while the interest was there the time
wasn't right and Beyond a symbolic throwing
of javelins in the ocean The Invasion never
came in the year 43 ad however Emperor Claudius
sailed across the sea with four Legions with Alo
plous leading the charge reaching Richboro located
on the east coast of Kent the invasion of Britain
began despite only spending 16 days on the island
the glory seeking Emperor returned to Rome in the
year 44 and was hailed a hero despite the emperor
leaving the Empire continued its invasion they
swiftly took the territory of kavalani a Celtic
tribe State before spreading north and west by the
year 60 much of Wales was under Roman control
Roman kingdoms were created in modern-day Nori
and other places with the Vespasian who would
later become emperor sending his Legion to the
Southwest to capture tribal settlements it was
around this time that cities like londinium
which would later be known as London was built
while the Romans seemed like an Unstoppable
Force the Britains continued to resist them a
member of a Celtic Tribe Called kerus managed
to persuade groups in Wales to help fight the
Romans but he was captured he managed to escape
captivity and fled to a region ruled by the
ancient Britains known as the brigantes but
the queen chose to hand him back over to the
Romans as a sign of new found loyalty kerus
was sent back to Rome with his family as prisoners
and surprisingly was spared death by Claudius Boda
the Roman Ally and wife of pigus who was the
client King of the ASI tribe headed a revolt
against the empire after the death of her husband
half of his kingdom was to be given to the Romans
while Boda would be left to rule the other half
Rome wasn't happy with sharing the kingdom with
somebody they classed as a trator and decided to
plunder the whole thing if they couldn't have all
of it then nobody could Voda retaliated by sending
her Army to linium where towns were plundered and
burnt down according to the Romans 70,000 Romans
were killed as a result of the Revolt although
Boda and her forces were eventually defeated
thanks to the expertise of Roman Governor gas
suetonius pinus Boda was believed to have ended
her own life with poison rather than surrender to
the Romans the Romans went on to defeat the Druid
stronghold at Angel who were targeted for their
Rel religion that was opposed to the Empire this
decision led to the emperor being replaced with
tonus who saw a great change in the way the Romans
ruled Britain eventually Britains gave into the
Roman culture and the previously plundered towns
and settlements were rebuilt including London
which became the capital of the Romans living in
Britain taxes were introduced mining techniques
were improved livestock and grain production was
increased increased tfold and the trade industry
flourished including that of slaves it was during
this time that roads were established throughout
the country that connected key locations such as
London York and the Welsh border this Innovation
built valuable trade networks and increased the
affluence of the capital the Romans were not
yet done when it came to controlling however as
they later moved into Northern Wales as well as
sailing over to invade Ireland the Romans further
implemented their culture in Britain building
amphitheaters Roman baths and teaching Latin
to its inhabitants by the year 130 formidable
military garrisons were built throughout the
continent and other territories ruled by groups
the Romans considered barbarians such as the
Balkans were encouraged to Aid in the Roman
expansion Britain was eventually split in half
which was called Britannia Superior and Britannia
inferior in order to rule more efficiently the
problem for the Romans was that the more they
spread out the more attention they got from other
enemies the island saw a barrage of attacks from
the pits of Scotland the Scots of Ireland and the
Saxons who traveled from Germany for a period a
successful rebellion led to the kingdom separating
from Rome although it was recaptured in the year
296 by the end of the fourth century and with
the emergence of Christianity on the continent
the Romans slowly lost control of Europe the
lack of food resources such as grain spelled
the end of the Roman Empire as the last Emperors
withdrew British cities were given the message
that the citizens now had defend for themselves
as the Empire finally fell this is where local
governments were created overthrowing the Roman
magistrates that had governed more centuries
despite Britain no longer being a part of Rome
their culture continued and shaped the country
we see around us today in the decades that
followed Heretics battled Christians Saxons
from Ireland and Scotland raided English coastal
cities and Europe began to fall in what was known
as the Dark Ages Britain broke into smaller
kingdoms and a phase of regression began while
Britain saw some truly formidable enemies their
most challenging foe was one they didn't see
coming from across the crashing waves of the
North Sea in the year 793 a group of Norse people
from Scandinavia reached the shores of Britain
the first major violent incident committed by
these Invaders was the plundering of a Christian
Monastery ushering in the 300-year-old age of the
Vikings as more longboats arrived the barbaric
Invaders began raiding Coastal settlements
around England Scotland and Ireland eventually
the son of the legendary Ragnar Lo Brock Evar
the Boneless decided that it was time to take up
roots on the island instead of Simply pillaging
them this group of Invaders would become known as
the great Heathen Army in the year 865 the Army
arrived at one of the four kingdoms of Britain
East Anglia fearful of the Warriors the king
of East Anglia Edmund the Martyr offered the
Warriors Provisions horses and shelter in order
to be spared the violence pillaging and being
taken over following defeat Edmund the Martyr
was captured possibly tor tortured and killed it
only took a couple of years for the Vikings to
capture York the capital of one of the other four
kingdoms North Umbria by the year 870 all of the
kingdoms had been successfully taken over by the
Vikings except for Wessex at this point it was the
Danish warlord Guam the old who was leading the
Norse Army while Alfred the Great remained king
of Wessex the two forces met an a blot battle in
878 known as the Battle of Edington where Alfred
the Great claimed Victory this led to the two
factions making a deal which became known as the
Treaty of wedmore in a strange turn of events one
of the requirements of the treaty was to have Guam
baptized with King Alfred becoming his Godfather
the Vikings were also ordered to leave wessix
and never return soon after the two rulers made
another deal that defined B boundaries and opened
up trade routes between the two factions over
many years Viking Customs had taken full effect in
the territories they owned including London this
land would become known as Dean laong with Derby
leester Lincoln Nottingham and Stanford becoming
the most important towns under their control these
five burrows were ruled by five Danish armies
all under the control of yarl a Viking Elite for
all almost a century the Vikings and Anglo-Saxons
lived in harmony trading working and even mating
with the opposite factions many words we use today
also came from the old Viking language such as
words beginning with SK such as Sky other words
derived from Old Norse include the word ugly which
stemmed from the Viking word uger husband which
came from husbandi gift which came from gift AEG
that became egg and Thursday which came from the
Viking word for midweek which was known as Thor's
dagger or Thor's day it was the Viking strong
belief in a law system that not only developed
the word law in the English language but also
the word wrong which expresses their belief in
differentiating from what was deemed unacceptable
when it came to their beliefs while Alfred the
Great used the time of peace to build forts
and other forms of Defense within his kingdom
His Daughter aof flat used the strongholds to wage
war against the Vikings after her husband died in
the year 911 she took control over the kingdom of
meria which gave her the name Lady of the mercians
thereafter the five buroughs under Viking rule
were eventually defeated and in 954 the last Nord
King the legendary Eric blood axe was forced out
of the region of North Umbria this ended the era
of Dan Law which was now known as England although
the Viking Reign was squashed those that retreated
were not finished with the land they called Home
in the year 113 Swain forkbeard and his band of
Viking warriors returned with the leader becoming
the first Danish King of England after the death
of the king his son can the great took over until
he passed away in 10:35 the rule of the Vikings
ended when King Herold successfully thwarted
King Herold hardrada of Norway in 1066 in a
conflict known as the Battle of Stamford Bridge
this time the Viking Invaders had been expelled
from England forever although their legacy lives
on to this day within the DNA of their descendants
oh [Music]
the Middle Ages and the Viking age overlap
with this period starting around the year
400 and lasting over a, years ending in 1485
this period is broken down into three sections
the early high and late Middle Ages we have
already covered the Early Middle Ages with the
rule of the Vikings and the Anglo-Saxons
after the fall of both of these groups
in 1066 after the defeat of Nord ruler
king Herold hardrada and Edward the
Confessor the latter who saw defeat by the
Normans during the Battle of Hastings while
the Anglo Saxon time came to an end during their
time they made great strides and advancements to
their settlements families began building
a single house for all their generations
to live in from the youngest child to their
grandparents these homes were made from wood
and had thatched roofs to keep them dry and
warm all the houses were built close together
with a grand hall being the focal point of
their Community the heart of the home was
known as The Hearth which was a fire that
would be used to cook food provide a light
source and keep the family warm it wasn't
just homes that the Anglo-Saxons improved
but the agriculture of the land in fact the
main form of work during this period was
farming this involved cultivating crops breeding
raising preparing and trading animals as well as
chopping down trees to create more farmland and
to construct new buildings even the children
were put to work during this time who would
herd cows and sheep with the help of the dogs
they trained and took care of there were also
incredibly skilled professions within Anglo
in communities including blacksmiths who made
everything from weapons to tools Carpenters
who built furniture carts and bowls cobblers who
used leather to make shoes and Jewelers who used
precious metals to craft beautiful items that
could be traded with the wealthy in fact it
was the Anglo-Saxons who invented the plow which
completely changed the way farming was done they
also discovered that when tamed a horse could do
a much better job of pulling plows through the
soil than oxen speeding up the farming process
exponentially regardless their time had to come
to an end with the Anglo Normans taking route the
Normandy Dynasty began with William the also known
as William the Conqueror who ruled England until
his death on September 9th 1087 the invasion of
England was no easy feat with even the mighty
Roman Empire struggling to take over completely
this heralded William as a hero which brought
him much attention throughout the rest of Europe
it was during his Reign that the landscape of the
continent changed dramatically once more the first
stone-built Norman Castle was built in Wales with
others joining them throughout the island in fact
the Normans invaded much of whales and built their
castles to establish strongholds against anyone
who opposed them the Normans brought beautiful
stone architecture to England including the
breathtaking Canterbury cathedral which was
finished in 1077 the Tower of London finished
in 1078 the Oxford University which was founded
in 1096 and the commission of the Doomsday Book
which recorded land valuation throughout
England and parts of Wales while William
was considered a great ruler by the Normans
the feudal system implemented in the country
meant that anglosaxon land owners and farmers were
now peasant Farmers working for whatever governing
power was above them they were stripped of their
Heritage hard work and wealth the feudal system
saw a quarter of the previous owner's land given
to William the Conqueror while another quarter
of the land was donated to the Church of Rome the
remains of the land were given to the people who
were loyal to William who held high status in
return these people were t f with the duty of
creating an army from those living in the area
if William ever needed it for these Noble folk
however the job was beneath them which led to
them putting knights in charge of Recruitment and
training The Peasant farmers who the crown stole
from were not spared this Duty with them being
forced to swear allegiance to the knights with
their advance in agriculture came more variety
in the food they grew and ate the Normans grew
a liking despised food often cooking with care
away seeds Ginger cardamom pepper and Nutmeg
because the Normans celebrated Christmas these
ingredients were added to their traditional winter
meals with the affluent of society having Grand
feasts that included pheasants peacocks wild
boar jellies and custards common foods eaten
by peasants were salted or pickled foods such
as pickled herrings bacon and vegetable broths
because they took longer to expire while the
noble members of the land washed their feasts
down with wine The Peasants drank strong alses
the high and late periods of the Middle Ages
which Spann the 11th to the 13th centuries saw
a great deal of change that negatively impacted
the country the feudal system encouraged huge
social changes in class systems while Rebellion
saw Mass upheaval while the introduction of the
Renaissance saw introduced artistic expression
and and storytelling that would eventually give
famous playwrights such as William Shakespeare
and Christopher Marlo the tools to tell the
Common People political or romantic stories
that were often inspired by real life events
from the past this period of time has been
romanticized by literature and modern media
portraying the period as one with blushing
maidens eyw watering Feats Majestic castles
watching over the people of the land and knights
bravely Galloping into battle mounted on a steed
in truth it was a difficult and dangerous life for
most of the populace eventually after several sons
of William the Conqueror spent time on the throne
William the conqueror's grandson Steven of blah
became king in the year 1135 this started a huge
Civil War in Britain known as the Anarchy which
lasted from 1138 to 1154 this conflict was led by
Steven of Blah's cousin the empress Matilda who
believed the crown was her rightful inheritance
this time was incredibly difficult for everyone
living in Britain from the wealthy Nobles to the
lowly peasants people began to get suspicious
and desperate which led to oppression and
mistreatment many innocent people were tortured
and interrogated for valuable information While
others stole goods and gold in order to make
money for their families most people were left
with nothing which led to families starving to
death the Civil War ended when Steven of bloah
died in 1154 when Empress Matilda's son Henry
II took the throne the rule of Henry II was a
fairly peaceful one which was bolstered by his
friendship with Thomas Beckett the Archbishop of
Canterbury together the two men had power over the
people of England and their religion unfortunately
the Friendship wasn't long lived with Henry
ordering the murder of Thomas Becket inside
of the canterberry cathedral the freedom of a man
was complicated during the 12th century with some
men being connected to land ownership but forced
to pay the Lord others only paid rent but owed no
land while some found themselves in the middle
owing a service to a Master while having to pay
rent for the land they lived on if at any point
someone couldn't pay their taxes they would then
have to answer to a Master overlooking the area
while the nonfree people known as surfs could be
freed of their obligation another way of escaping
control was to escape to another burrow and live
there for a whole year if the fugitive was caught
before then however the Lord of The Manor had the
right to beat and imprison the man king John
who came to throne in 1199 was one of the
cruestv and and a tyrant he struck fear in the
hearts of his subjects increasing taxes so that
he could use the profit to hire mercenaries
to keep everyone in check no one was spared
the wrath of King John with even the pope finding
himself on the wrong end of the king in the year
128 John refused to accept a man named Steven
Langton as the Archbishop of Canterbury after
Pope Innocent III decided to ignore the king's
suggested candidates regarding less the church
bells of Britain were not rung and the church
stopped burying people but King John still refused
to allow Steven Ling to take up the role this
resulted in the pope excommunicating King John
which absolved all English subjects of their oath
of allegiance to him which caused him to lose all
power over them this blow to King John resulted
in a Revolt breaking out in the country and the
King of France used the chaos to challenge the
rulership of England with the upheaval King John
was forced to sign a very important Charter called
the Magna Carta agreeing that the country would
abide by many laws and justices four of which
are still present to this day these are the four
Clauses with no other choice the French invasion
in full swing King John eventually accepted
Steven Lon as the Archbishop of can Canberry this
decision led to the forces of the country abiding
the King again which allowed them to defeat the
French armies on the coast of Flanders located
in Belgium in 1265 King Henry III was incredibly
against the citizens of the country having any
say in the Kingdom's rulership the Earl of
Lester Simone defor thought differently and
opposed the king while the Magna Carta laid the
groundwork for the prominent laws of the country
de monford created the first parliament of England
electing people to speak on behalf of the average
person just like today the representatives
of parliament had their expenses paid in
1298 taxation control was given to Parliament
bolstering the institution one of the most
devastating pandemics in British history was the
Black Plague which devastated the population in
1347 in fact over 20 100 million people died from
the viral disease throughout Europe in total with
1 and a half million of those coming from Britain
the initial English plague lasted 3 years ending
in 1350 with a disease popping back up multiple
times in the 50 years that followed for many
years it was believed that the plague was passed
on by rats but it's now believed to be an airborne
disease that would kill those infected in just a
few days peasants were affected the worst as there
were so many poor people living in close contact
with each other due to the unprecedented volume of
people dying rotting corpses were left piled up
in the street with the Primitive science of the
day offering no cure or prevention for the plague
with peasant workers dropping from the disease it
became increasingly difficult to find people to
tend to the fields and grow crops this led to
starvation and the decimation of entire Villages
as they were desperately in demand many peasant
workers took advantage of the situation moving
around the country to find higher paid positions
the government didn't like the fact that peasants
were now able to better themselves and chose
decide with those willing to pay more after trying
to put a stop to them traveling to find higher
paid jobs the Government tried to put a stop to
it this resulted in The Peasant Revolt of 1381
in which the poor folk of England violently banded
together in order to get pole tax and the wage cap
removed as well as the abolishment of the control
Lords had over them and their property another
huge event that happened in the Middle Ages
was the War of the Roses which saw the House of
Lancaster and the house of York fight each other
between 1455 and 1485 the reason for the war was
that both sides were the descendants of a previous
King Edward III and wanted to take their rightful
place on the throne the last significant Battle
of the wars of the Roses the Battle of Bosworth
field saw one of the most famous Kings in English
History Richard III fall in battle after this
Henry iith took the throne who married Elizabeth
of York and joined the two opposing houses of
Lancaster and York together with the birth of the
infamous Henry VII the tutor period was ushered
[Music] in the tutor period had a huge focus
on the reshaping and a rethinking of religion
politics and the monarchy in Britain after
defeating Richard the third's army during the
Battle of Bosworth in 1485 Henry VII's rule saw
the beginning of a 118-year Reign for the tutors
which saw a total of five monarchs sit upon the
throne in fact the rulers of this period have
become some of the most recognizable in English
History it was this rulership that played a huge
part in shaping England and later the United
Kingdom through the economic changes the role
changed for women and Countrywide religious reform
the marriage between the two cousins brought the
feud between the lancasters and the Yorks together
bringing two of the most influential families of
England together Henry and Elizabeth went on to
have eight children together in order to cement
the longevity of the family rule although only
Arthur Henry Margaret and Mary tutor made it to
their adult years Arthur went on to marry Princess
Catherine of Aragon but soon died after Princess
Margaret married James ivth which earned her the
title of Queen consort of Scotland Princess Mary
went on to marry the French King Lewis I 12 and
Henry VII became the king of England as Henry
was the Second Son of the monarchy he was prepared
for a career in the church but after his two other
brothers died he was made King in 159 in fact
he lost his two brothers and father in a 7-year
period which is a Testament to the short lifespan
people had back in those days regardless of status
Henry was Keen to find a wife and turned to his
own brother's widow Princess Catherine of Aragon
to take up this role Henry's 36-year rule saw many
impactful changes to the country and caused some
of the biggest controversies in English History up
until that point the first of which was his change
and attitude towards his wife who failed to give
him a minut male heir to the throne after 23 years
of marriage he became so desperate for a male Heir
in fact that he eventually turned his back on the
Catholic church and began his own the Church of
England with the King now able to establish his
own marriage and anull rules Henry allowed himself
to remarry so that he could have a son to ensure
his legacy remained on the throne this Freedom
allowed Henry to have six marriages in total
which allowed him to have many children while
only one would be a boy his son Edward v 6 was
crowned King in 1547 after Henry passed away of
tuberculosis in a Twist of irony after all the
effort his father put into ensuring the bloodline
continues Edward died just a few years later in
1553 leaving no male heirs to take up the mantle
this death left the tutor government in chaos
with only his two sisters Mary and Elizabeth
being the only candidates for succession this
was an ideal as they were both female and had
religious views that were not in line with that
of the Protestants the religion that Henry VII
was converting the Catholics too in fact it was
Edward's devout Catholic Half Sister Mary that
was the rightful heir to the throne due to her
religion however Edward named Lady Jane gray as
Queen who was his cousin once removed because she
was a Protestant Mary however wasn't going to
let her Birthright go to another relation this
resulted in Lady Jane only reigning for 9 days
before being executed for high treason along
with her husband two of his brothers and the
former Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas cranmer
now with Mary on the throne the tutors were
once again thrown into chaos as she set about
reversing all the work her father and brother did
reverting the primary religion of England back to
Catholicism this change was done aggressively
with the Protestant people now persecuted for
being Heretics this led to 300 people who
refused to be conformed to Catholicism being
burned at the stake this dark patch in English
History is now known as the Marian persecution
not only were Queen Mary's forceful religious
views a problem for people of nobility but so
was her gender being the first queen which was
earned in her own right several of the most
influential Nobles insisted that she should
marry a Protestant man in order to heal the
relationship with her people Mary who would not
be pushed around chose to marry the Spanish Prince
Philip II in 1554 instead unfortunately the pair
didn't have any children despite many attempts
eventually Mary named her Protestant half-sister
Elizabeth the next heir to the throne as she Lay
Dying Elizabeth the first had a long Reign that
spanned 1558 to 16003 in which he did a lot for
the country as the daughter of Anne boin Elizabeth
had to work hard to persuade her people to support
her due to her intelligence and likable character
she had a glorious reign with that being said
there were several issues throughout that time
and including her Catholic enemies attempting
to murder her an attack from Rome and her decision
to stay single regardless she faced adversity and
earned the nickname Gloriana Good Queen Bess and
the Virgin Queen when she passed away in 16003 the
tutor period came to an end before the tutor era
agriculture played a huge part in the lifestyle
of the country with a 90% of the population
working on F Arland this was an incredibly
hard life that came with a low life expectancy as
the Age of Exploration began the focus shifted to
trade coal tin iron and Lead mining began to grow
exponentially which made the country incredibly
rich with that being said famine and poverty was
still Rife in tutor England in 1530 however the
cruel laws against Beggars were abolished and
vagrants were allowed to beg b as long as they
had a license this led to an influx of Beggars
which resulted in a new law being passed in 1547
which meant that anyone caught begging would
be imprisoned for 2 years in 1550 this law
was changed again with the punishment for the
vagrant being a flogging which meant that they
were struck on the back with a whip or Rod the
rule of Elizabeth the first introduced the poor
law in 16001 which gave the poor a tax relief as
well as other forms of support it was during this
time that the criminal system took a preference
to physical punishments rather than being thrown
into prison this included fogging and putting
into stocks which would add humiliation to the
punishment those who committed the more serious
crimes such as murder still resulted in execution
the noble and affluent criminals would still
be beheaded like previous centuries while the
poor and common population would be hung at The
Gallows often with crowds Gathering to watch the
spectacle a focus on education came with a tutor
period with Richard mulcaster the educationalist
insisting that a boy's education was the most
important as they were more worthy this led to
boys from wealthy families being sent to grammar
school and universities before the girls despite
a female monarchy ruled ruling over the country
the future of girls was predetermined to be that
of wives and mothers well-versed in Needle work
cooking and cleaning eventually girls were given
the right to get an education although it was
limited to only reading and writing eventually
Local Schools were established where boys and
girls would study together it was during the
tutor period that leisurely activities began
to rise many people began playing tennis and
football as well as watching jousting events and
gambling the more affluent of society played chess
and gambled by playing card games such as Premo
and naughty which was the precursor to cribbage
[Music]
[Music] [Applause]
after Elizabeth the passed away in 16003 and
the reign of the tutors came to an end James I
6th became King James was the son of Mary Queen
of Scots who had been executed for treason and
had become a martyr for the Catholic faith while
many hoped that James would support the Catholic
religion he refused to repeat the same mistakes as
Queen Mary by trying to roll back the Reformation
when the Catholics living in England didn't get
the support they wanted a group of people began to
plot an assassination this plan involved blowing
up the houses of Parliament on a day that they
knew the king would be present in 1605 guy Fox and
his group of conspirators stored a large volume of
gunpowder in a stor room that was directly
below the House of Lords unfortunately for
the conspirators the plan was foiled on November
5th which led to all of the men being hung drawn
and cour this day became known as bonfire night
celebrated with fireworks every year on November
5th despite the assassination attempt on the whole
James brought peace to the country joining England
and Scotland together who had previously been
locked in Conflict after James died it was his
son Charles that took the throne in 1625 Charles
was devoted to the Anglican church and loved the
Arts which was reflected in his rule with without
a parliament in place eventually he was forced to
recall Parliament so he could raise money but
he refused to give them any power and control
over the land and church this led to a civil
war breaking out in August 1642 this conflict
snowballed with the number of people killed
estimated to be in the millions through the 9
years it raged on the Civil Wars forced castles to
go into service some of which hadn't been used for
their military purpose since the Middle Ages many
of them were sieged by opposing factions in order
to gain strongholds that would provide a strategic
advantage in 1647 King Charles was defeated by the
parliament's Army led by Sir Thomas Fairfax
and Oliver Cromwell Charles was held prisoner
at carisbrook Castle where peace negotiations were
to take place unbeknown to Fair facts in Cromwell
however Charles was secretly planning a second
Civil War which broke out a year after he was
imprisoned this led to the king being executed
in 1649 the news that a king had been beheaded
shocked Britain in Europe which led to the Future
Charles II trying to invade the country with the
help of the Scots this attempt failed with Charles
only avoiding death by hiding inside an oak tree
at boscabel and Shropshire government and church
Powers weakened after the beheading which saw the
rise of new and radical ideas often spread through
pamphlets growing religious sects began to preach
about the second coming of Christ a belief
that spread throughout the country at this
time Oliver Cromwell ruled the Commonwealth
of England Scotland and Ireland Dawning the
title of Lord protector although Cromwell had
his own radical religious views he allowed all
religions to be practiced throughout the country
Cromwell used used his army to keep control of the
country right up until his death when his forces
weakened and Charles II was free to return in 1660
to rule the country the reign of Charles II which
spanned 25 years saw changes to Art architecture
daily life and Leisure in fact it was this period
that saw the Revival of theaters this period also
brought some incredible scientific discoveries
such as the manufact facture of phosphorus which
was dipped into wooden splints to create matches
with that being said there were several disasters
that happened during this time including the Great
Plague of 1665 and the Great Fire of London that
broke out in 1666 after a fire broke out in a
small bakery the Catholic brother of the King
James went under heavy criticism about whether he
should be the next king regardless he succeeded
his brother becoming King James II while the
king defended the throne against the Duke of
Monmouth his illegitimate Protestant brother he
became disliked by many for the violent Trials of
the rebels and policies put forward by the king
eventually William of Orange and the daughter of
James invaded England which led to James fleeing
and the pair being crowned king and queen the rule
of William III and Mary II marked a peaceful
period for the country Mary sister Anan took
the throne afterward in 1702 while her Reign was
known for the victory over Lewis I 14th the most
Monumental event was the act of Union which saw
the beginning of a United Great Britain now we've
spoken a lot about the monarchy and Rule as it
was the rich and Powerful that could learn to read
and write to document their lives and historical
achievements but what were the lives of everyday
Britains like in the steart era most of the common
people during this era were poor with some forced
to live in terrible conditions this was only made
worse by the influx in population which saw entire
areas impoverished and starving this led to poor
laws being implemented which were first introduced
a century before by Elizabeth I which helped
the poorest people of the country most of those
working have a master above them who would provide
them with a room and wages to live on vagrancy
became a huge issue during this period as the
most impoverished of people were forced to beg
or claim charity from family and Neighbors in
fact many poor people chose to travel to the
new world in order to change their lives and
make money while times were most difficult at
the start of the steart period things got better
near the end of it for the poor the focus was on
finding the next meal when food stocks were down
people concentrated on the Harvest industry when
soldiers during the Civil War War were waiting for
payment many of them resorted to stealing crops
and livestock which heavily affected the industry
and led to more starvation while the working class
ate legum based diets such as beans soy beans
and lentils the affluent ate Rich meat diets and
very sweet desserts this led to many illnesses
as a result including diabetes and hemorroids
while there was a lot of poverty in England many
people held jobs to provide for their families
merchants and store owners flourished during
the steart era which gave them the money to
leave London when the plague broke out in the
country many people were employed as shoemakers
blacksmiths tailor saddle crafters and Glovers
just to name a few on the streets and cities
of towns many people sold a variety of wees from
oysters to Furniture as well as offering services
that ranged from shoe shining to prostitution
those working on Farm would be in charge of
milking cows collecting eggs tilling the fields
and taking care of the livestock during this
period like those that came before it roles were
defined by the Sexes with girls expected to follow
the orders of their father Brothers husbands and
then their sons the wife and mother of the family
were put in charge of running and cleaning the
house preparing food and raising the children
if a woman came from a wealthy family she could
avoid marriage and the duties that came with it
while poorer women chose to work as servants
wet nurses or midwives the sad truth is that
many women only found Freedom after being made
a widow some could argue that when it came to
relationships aristocratic families had it more
difficult than Common People the reason for this
was because the influential and Wealthy were
forced to marry due to political or financial
reasons rather than genuine love marriage was
so important during steuart brid WR that an
Act was passed in 1604 that stated that a man
who left his family or committed bamy would
be deemed a rogue which would Merit a punishment
for example a case went to trial over a man named
Thomas Middleton who had to provide evidence
to prove he was only married to one woman in
the later part of the stward era a document
called the political arithmetic was published
which talked about all of the people working in
England including those working in agriculture
and Manufacturing in it William Petty the writer
expressed his concern about how gold and silver
were now in scarcity and that the country was
growing poorer by the day he also claimed that
the focus on Ireland Scotland and America was a
burden to the country and provided no advantage
while this opinion may sound harsh many share the
opinion that England had overstretched its assets
which now meant the population was suffering
as a result by the early 17th century Scotland
Wales and Ireland were unified with England and
in 1707 Queen Anne officially packed the acts
of Union sadly life expectancy was much shorter
than that of today with the likelihood of children
dying being incredibly high in fact child birth
was dangerous for both the mother and the child
without the medicines and treatments we have
today if the trauma and pain didn't kill the
mother infections would soon after experts believe
that 25 women out of a thousand died giving birth
during the Stewart period other things that killed
young people during this era were worms plague and
dysentery as well as an illness known as griping
in the guts which killed people through diarrhea
and crippling stomach pain a major factor in these
kinds of illnesses came down to personal hygiene
which the stewards did not hold in high regard
this also led to parasites like fleas and lice
infesting every level of social class intestinal
worms were also common with eggs being laid or
pass into Foods when being prepared in their
spare time people living in the Stewart period
would enjoy dancing singing and listening to live
music at music halls and other venard while higher
classes went to the theater common folk would
enjoy betting on [__] and dog fighting another
Blood Sport that brought many people together
were public exit executions which would be
held in town squares during the steart era food
and drinks from other countries began to become
popular in England the reason for this was down
to the global trade routes established via Road
in Ocean which also introduced wears never seen
before on British soil this included Furs from
North America tea from China and spices from
India this is where the pallet of the British
people changed with exotic Wares and ingredients
being welcomed into the culture by 1633 strange
yellow fruit known as bananas were found on
Market stalls while the first coffee houses
and tea rooms open their doors it was here that
many people would visit to discuss politics and
other business during its early days coffee
was considered to be a man's drink which led
to women being banned from visiting the coffee
houses women looking for a warm drink could
visit tea rooms however while hot chocolate was
available to higher class members of both [Music]
[Music] sexes the 18th century known as the
Georgian era saw the rise of the IND Industrial
Revolution where England was dominated by the
age of steam network of canals and factories
manufacturing on a larger scale with that
being said the workshops were still small
such as textile workers who would spin weave dye
cloth and repair clothing this industry was made
up of thousands of small scale operations
areas of Britain specialized in a specific
area of Industry such as metal production in the
Midlands mining in the Northeast and glassw work
in the West Midlands state-of-the-art Technologies
led to breakthroughs in agriculture and Industry
which changed the country exponentially food
production was increased which ensured that
there were plenty of it to go around affording it
on the other hand was a different matter for the
poor foreign workers in vagabonds offered cheap
labor which created mass unemployment across the
country especially in rural Villages this led to
many people living in the country relocating to
larger towns and cities to find work these people
were welcomed into the growing factories which in
turn increased manufacturer and the development
of Technology the only thing that slowed down
production however was The Limited power sources
with many businesses relying on water wheels
windmills and horses to work large tools and
machines with the advancement of steam introduced
by Thomas n com and his steam-driven piston engine
Industries now had a way of increasing their
workflow as well as pumping water from flooded
mines transporting goods across the country VIA
trains and powering large textile mills by the
late 19th century around 2,000 steam engines were
in use in Britain the Darby family of Shropshire
re-imaged the iron manufacturing process which
offered stronger metals that were ideal for making
machines and larger tools with the help of steam
engines coal mining was made more efficient in
turn the spoils were used to power steam engines
across the company this means that coal was one of
the most valuable Industries in the entire country
in 1769 Richard arcrite created the water frame
which allowed large scale textile spinning to take
place a short time later James hargreeves'
spinning jenny was made available which
made cotton spinning much easier in 1780 edaman
card R's Power Loom continued the string of
advancements which made cheap clothing available
to the entire population as Steam Industries
continued to evolve so did the types of businesses
using them factories began sprouting up all over
the country which provided goods and materials to
many parts of the world these companies provided
jobs on a scale that had not not been seen before
for example Richard arr's cotton factories in
notingham Saw almost 600 employees at their Peak
while some factories in Birmingham had almost
a thousand employees at any one time during the
1770s even children were employed as their small
hands were ideal for intricate work such as making
buckles buttons and locks many of these businesses
were in incredibly dangerous work environments not
to mention that the workers were treated poorly
in fact many compared some factories to prisons
with those who made mistakes or not working hard
enough facing physical discipline workhouses
and orphanages would send children to work
in factories and mines which put them in danger
some would pass out through heat While others got
caught in fast-moving Machinery as they were sent
through them to maintain them the canal systems
created to transport the coal Supply around
the country also provided jobs for many people
the early systems were limited but incredibly
important for example the canal commissioned
by the Duke of Bridgewater connected Worley to
Manchester which haved the price of coal within
just a couple of weeks with the success of the
already existing Canal networks more and more were
commissioned by the government in 1815 over 2,000
M of canal were available in Britain transporting
thousands of tons of precise Metals coal and Wares
on barges towed by horses with the focus being on
the canals the roads were left in a very poor
State many of which were flooded or overgrown
with vegetation this caused trades that traveled
via wagon and cart to suffer with food unable to
be delivered by using the roads Britain was facing
a problem to rectify it the government passed the
turnpike acts which allowed a New Roads to be
built and used a toll system to pay for their
construction and upkeep headed by Engineers like
John McAdam and Thomas tford roads began to spread
throughout the country in the 1780s the improved
roads not only allowed trades to operate again but
they actually made it more efficient this meant
that a stage coach could travel from Edinburgh to
London in Just 2 days which almost took 2 weeks
50 years previously this was groundbreaking at
the time and further revolutionized industry in
Britain the people of Britain adopted a strange
Fascination for criminals and law Breakers during
the late 1700s with those committing crimes being
depicted as heroes in newspapers and printed
pamphlets that were circulated throughout the
streets Tales of Daring thefts and crimes led
to Highwaymen people who prayed on traveling
carriages becoming celebrities these characters
became Legends and inspired many others to do the
same when a thief called Jack Shepard was publicly
hung in 1724 200,000 people turned up to celebrate
his career another the flamboyant John ran was
met with his adoring fans in the street of London
after he was found not guilty of a theft for
others the rise and growing popularity of crime
was worrying thefts were at an all-time high and
those committing the Deeds were not being caught
or punished there was an outcry for criminal
investigations and punishments to be improved
which eventually led to the police force we know
today although it was very different in the early
days back then the punishment of criminals was
left down to the victims who were in charge of
the investigations while there were two constables
in each Parish these were people elected in the
community who worked on a voluntary basis this
means that most of the police work was done
after the men had done their day job with some of
them paying others to do the duty for them later
a group of paid Watchmen were hired in London
known as Charlies who were close to what we know
of modern policing today these men would Patrol
the street perform investigations and arrest
criminals part of their duties was to bring drunk
people home and yelling out the time for people
many accused The Watchmen of being ineffective
and cried out for changes to be implemented in
the system this opinion was listened to in the
1750s with professional forces being established
in 1751 Henry Fielding started the Bow Street
Runners which saw the first armed men carrying
out investigations and arrests on behalf of the
public the suspects of these crimes were judged
by local magistrates without a jury having any
say in determining guilt this of course led to
many innocent people being imprisoned or executed
for crimes they didn't commit whether it was done
through wrongful conviction or political motives
once again these officials were volunteers who
were elected from influential members of society
this meant that many of them were not well-versed
in the law and took the position as a statement of
power rather than Justice Horus Walpole an English
writer once said that the greatest criminals of
society were the officers of Justice referencing
the corruption within British law this in many
cases was true with several taking bribes or
being reluctant to perform their duties out of
laziness the most serious crimes like rape and
murder were dealt with by the Crown Court which
were located in large towns or the famous Old
Bailey the experience for common people standing
trial was scary with the stench of unwashed
criminals being covered with scented flowers and
herbs which were also believed to stop the disease
from spreading much of the trial was done in Latin
as was tradition which meant many suspects were
confused as to what was being said or the details
being put forward to make things worse criminal
defenses were not introduced until the later
part of the Georgian period which meant that
Witnesses were examined by the judge and jury
members if these officials took a disliking to
the character of the suspect they would be found
guilty without all the facts being known in fact
these cases were over in a matter of minutes
with several cases being conducted in a day to
speed the process along in the early 1800s courts
abided by the bloody code which was a list of 200
crimes that justified an execution these included
crimes such as treason rape and murder as well as
less serious crimes like stealing the poaching of
animals and even vandalism fortunately for many
most of these crimes that could Merit death ended
up with imprisonment regardless this struck fear
in the hearts of many with the idea of visiting
The Gallows for a crime they didn't commit being
a very real possibility those who were unfortunate
enough to face the Gallows were done so in a
public spectacle with hundreds of people turning
up to watch the life of a criminal snuffed out
while many saw it as Twisted entertainment it was
done as a deterrent for others up until 1783 the
hangings took place at tyburn middle six eight
times a year with up to 20 criminals hung at the
same time those sentenced to death would endure
a threemile cart ride to the Gallows which would
be mobbed by hundreds of people screaming and
throwing things once they were all lined up on
the wooden scaffolding The Noose would be tied
around their necks and trap doors would open
after the executions white doves were released as
a symbol of respect after which a moment's silence
was insisted many criminals were often sent to
American colonies as well as Australian colonies
to serve their sentences through hard and unpaid
labor other punishments included Hefty fines
being flogged and whipped and literally branded a
criminal with a burning hot rod these punishments
were often done under the watchful eye of the
public who were allowed to Pelt them with rotten
fruit and vegetables lifelong imprisonment was
also implemented Ed at the end of the Georgian
period which were known as houses of Correction
with the advancements of Industry seen in the
Georgian era the 19th century saw a period of
exponential growth that carried on through to
the Victorian era at this point industries of
Rural and agriculture were dwarfed by factories
and urbanization this Sudden Change was a culture
shock to many communities and it took a while for
the government and the people of Britain to get
used to this new way of life the Victorian era
started in 1837 and ended around the outbreak of
the first world war despite Queen Victoria passing
away in 1901 it was during this era that Britain
saw another boom in the population with figures
doubling between 1801 and 1871 this was down to
people being able to afford the upkeep of larger
families as a result of the work opportunities
the IND Industrial Revolution provided migration
in the country increased population although
many left the country also in fact a large
number voluntarily left for the American colonies
in search of a better life in the new world large
groups of Irish workers made up a majority
of the migrants especially in 1845 during the
Irish Potato Famine that caused starvation in
many parts of the country people from Ireland
Scotland and the English Countryside flocked to
industrial cities for work as well as Jews from
Europe and Russia while conditions for working
children were awful a legislation for protecting
child and adult workers was passed by parliament
which was campaigned by Michael Sadler and the
Earl of Shaftsbury this forced safer procedures to
be implemented within mines and factories and also
put an end to slavery within the British Empire
education for children younger than 10 was also
made compulsory which nurtured the prospect of
common people taking up more skilled jobs the
police force which had evolved a lot since the
19th century was more organized and efficient
they also began a prison reform program that
saw conditions within prisons greatly improve
while there still were clear social class
divides social freedom and the ability to
keep more of their money had improved many
lives entrepreneurs taking advantage of the
opportunities within the Victorian era used
their wealth to rise in society building huge
houses and emptying domestic servants to take
care of the household in fact in the 1880s
1.25 million people in Britain were working as
domestics which was more than any other industry
this was the first time that the hierarchy wasn't
governed by royalty or lordship which ushered
in a new era of social change the working class
was eventually allowed to vote in 1918 with the
suffrage of women ending in 1930 in 1776 Britain
lost the American Empire after America declared
independence during the American Revolutionary War
which resulted in the Empire turning its sights
to India in instead throughout the Victorian era
the expansion into other countries continued which
opened up more trade routes and prompted more
conflicts in 1851 the great exhibition presented
industrial and technological wonders to the world
at this point the British Empire was the leader of
trading and military strength making it a force
to be reckoned with in fact the British Empire
held so many territories that the Sun never set
upon the Empire referencing how far their control
reached it was during the Victorian period that
Leisure really boomed with religious holidays
Seaside vacations museums theaters Sports and
music Halls hitting Peak popularity with better
education and opportunities middleclass members
of society could now become skilled laborers
for the poor however circumstances were
just as bad as those seen centuries before
the houses of the middle class evolved during
this period with iron cooking ranges appearing in
most homes these ovens not only cooked food more
efficiently than before but also heated tanks that
provided hot water gas-powered geysers also sent
hot water from the tinks to the bathroom which
eliminated the need for a maid to carry buckets of
heated water up the stairs the coffee shops that
were once a hub for the affluent and politically
minded had been replaced with offices that
communicated with others through the Revolutionary
Telegraph system this allowed Britain to trade
with the entire world which was only improved
further in 1877 with the invention of the
telephone the English scientist and inventor
Henry Fox talit invented the first photographs
in 1834 which were known as Sun Pictures these
became wildly popular and were sold as carage
to visit very small photograph that were often
given to people as visiting cards among the most
popular subjects distributed was Queen Victoria
and her children which was the first time most
people had seen their Queen outside of officially
painted portraits at the great exhibition George
Jennings presented his state-of-the-art lavatories
which he called halting stations this invention
proved to be more sanitary Than People relieving
themselves in secluded corners of the street which
led to public lavatory being erected in 1852
a men's room was built in Fleet Street with
a woman's lavatory being built in the Strand
it was Thomas Crapper who developed the flush
aspect of the lavatory and also invented the end
many believe that the word for bodily waste came
from Thomas Crapper name although the word crap
actually came from the Dutch word crappin which
means to separate and the old French word crap
which means waste or rejected matter because
because cotton needs to be produced in a humid
environment many manufacturers established their
factories in Manchester because of the volume of
rain the city gets unfortunately the factories
were still full of dust and cotton fibers in the
air which resulted in many workers suffering from
breathing illnesses the large machines in these
factories also posed a risk with many of them not
having any form of safety protocols or guards this
led to several cases of women being scalped after
their hair got caught as well as hands fingers
and arms being caught and crushed in the moving
Parts children were often sent into or beneath the
machines to clear blockages or replace intricate
Parts which also ended in terrible accidents
elsewhere in the country the Gentry owning large
portions of land was becoming incredibly Rich
from coal mining with the industries utilizing
steam power keeping the demand High while mining
kept the country thriving the conditions deep
down in the earth were terrible children were
hired to drag the wagons from the coalface to
the shaft foot which would then be lifted to the
surface because they were much cheaper and more
obedient than horra carts this was incredibly
hard work and run the risk of being caught in a
collapse mines got incredibly hot which meant
that workers wore very little clothing and
had to drink beer to keep hydrated the reason
reason they drank alcohol was down to the poor
quality of water which caused diarrhea dissenter
chalera and typhoid which would prove deadly to
its drinkers in 1815 Sir Humphrey Davey invented
the safety lamp which allowed deeper excavations
into the Earth later ventilation techniques were
implemented although it wasn't until 1848 that
compressed air systems were invented employing
children under the age of 12 was banned in 1860
although the number of employees Grew From 200,000
to 500,000 in Britain this allowed 30 million tons
of coal to be excavated in 1836 which rose to
an incredible 44 million tons by 1880 by 1850
a person could only work for 10 hours a day with
night work abolished this meant that the average
working day lasted from 6:00 in the morning to
6:00 in the afternoon all also in 1850 lighting
and ventilation regulations came into effect for
mining further improving the well-being of the
workers with that being said mining was still an
incredibly dangerous job which wouldn't have been
properly improved until the 1900s it had become
common practice to pay workers with tokens that
could only be used at selected shops instead of
paying them money this led to shops inflating
prices and providing poor quality items as workers
had no other choice the truck Act established in
1831 set to end this practice but it took a long
time for it to end completely the British Empire
proved itself to be the most Innovative and
captive Market in the entire world due to its
industrial breakthroughs unfortunately it was
this achievement that became its own downfall
when it came to keeping all of its territories
as the prosperity inspired parts of the Empire
to become separate entities to seek their own
success at the time the United States was growing
at an incredible rate forging its own legacy
in technology and Innovation after the death
of fron Ferdinand and his morganatic wife Sophie
Duchess of hanenberg Austria Hungary blamed Serbia
which led to the July crisis eventually on July
28th 1914 Austria Hungary declared war on Serbia
along with other countries Britain offered up its
services in what is now known as the first world
[Music]
war this explosive period ushered in the
Modern Age where the focus shifted from
the monarchy and Industrial Revolution to the
development of weaponry and strategic Warfare
that took the lives of millions due to trench
warfare the country saw unprecedented levels
of death by the time the fighting came to an end
16 million lives both soldiers and civilians were
lost at this point Britain was dependent
on its industry and agriculture sectors
industry shifted their production to supplying
Munitions for the war effort with many forced
to by the government agriculture supplied food
to the country as stocks being imported to the
country became limited due to the threat of the
enemy while young men were enlisted in the Army
women had to go work in factories making bullets
and uniforms as well as working on farms women
also worked in nursing and caring roles as the
casualties took their toll on resources while
it was those on the front line that fought for
victory it would not have been possible without
the efforts of those back home in Britain at
the start of the war miners were told not to
join the Army as they needed to provide coal
for the war effort as the conflict raged on
however miners were drafted as tunners who were
tasked with the dangerous job of digging tunnels
to set explosives beneath enemy trenches as
well as placing landmines on the battlefield
the Germans were far more prepared for the war
which gave them a massive advantage in trench
warfare while there was a focus on drafting
experienced miners there was not enough to fill
the quota which led to civilians being trained
as Miners and sent to war eventually the British
were more skilled at tunneling than the Germans
with many miners enlisted in the Army there was
a shortage of coal in October 1916 which led to
the supply being rationed per household those
who refused to enlist in the Army were forced to
become miners instead to help maximize the coal
Supply many people working in agriculture were
enlisted in the Army which greatly affected the
industry because uots were blocking Imports coming
into the country farm work was crucial this work
was only made more difficult as blacksmiths and
plowmen were taken from farms to fight making it
incredibly difficult to replace them in order
to replace the male Farm Workers the women's
land Army was established which sent 260,000 women
to Farms to help agriculture work continue while
the war ended on November 11th 1918 sadly this
wasn't the last time Britain saw war and mass
death with World War II breaking out in 1945
when Germany invaded Poland between 1945 and
1951 Britain was healing from the effects
of World War II with the labor party leading
the charge after replacing Winston Churchill
the Prime Minister who was hailed a hero for
the part he played in the war five years ago I
promised you blood toil tears and sweat and your
untiring response brought us in the end victory
over Germany the labor party had been established
in 1900 to oppose the conservative party which
had been the country's oldest political party
the conservative party won the election in 1945
by a landslide and was favored as people believe
that the government didn't understand the
needs of Ordinary People despite Churchill's
impressive leader ship during the war many
believe that he wouldn't be a good leader
during a time of Peace during this period the
labor party established National Insurance in
1946 as well as the NHS the National Health
Service which has been providing free health
care for the British Nation since 1948 industrial
sectors such as mining banking gas and Aviation
were nationalized which allowed environments to
be made much safer for workers eventually the
economy recovered and industries returned to the
efficiency and profitability they had experienced
before shortly after World War II the cold war
between the United States and the Soviet Union
began in order to bolster the forces of their
allies the foreign secretary Ernest bevon offered
Britain support to the United States Britain also
participated in the Korean War in 1950 on the
side of South Korea alongside America Britain
later became an original member of NATO the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949 this
treaty was established with the United States
and other European nations in order to protect
them from the Soviet Union who were developing
nuclear warfare in 1947 India successfully
achieved Independence taking the Jewel of the
British crown away this was the start of the
British Empire dismantlement after centuries
of taking territories for their own between 1950
and 2000 Britain changed in many ways immigration
increased class division had completely ended
and the welfare state was established with the
loss of many colonies and territories Britain
joined a union with Europe the manufacturing
industries that made the country Thrive shifted
to providing services and relying on Imports
rather than producing ing them within the country
although Britain saw inflation and recessions the
standard of living was at an alltime high on
February 6th 1952 Queen Elizabeth II was named
the Queen of England following the death of King
George V 6 her father King George had to have one
of his lungs removed after it became cancerous
from years of smoking although he did recover
from the surgery he suddenly passed away in his
sleep from a coronary thrombosis a type of blood
clot in the heart although Britain was in peace
time after 1945 the threat of the cold war led to
the country spending heavily on defense military
supplies and training the threat of nuclear attack
was terrifying which led to funds being channeled
into developing defenses the leader of Egypt gal
Abdel Nasser nationalized the Suz canal in 1956
which was a huge blow to Britain's trade economy
in response Britain France and Israel decided
to invade Egypt in order to govern the Suz Canal
Network this was met with a lot of criticism from
the United States and other countries including
the Soviet Union this opposition led to the
United Kingdom withdrawing from The Invasion
as the United States and the United Nations put a
lot of pressure on them this resulted in the value
of the pound dropping as International investors
with withdrew their interest and assets this led
to a financial crisis that proved that Britain
needed to rely on allies when it came to military
strategy following the two World Wars the 1960s
brought a new age of Liberation and expression
with the culture shifting to new art experimental
music and creative fashion this period of
anti- conservatism moved away from traditional
institutions and practices further diminishing the
class divide the country also went through a
period of Reform which tackled issues such as
abortion divorce sexual orientation and racial
discrimination subjects that were taboo up until
this point unfortunately this period also saw one
of the worst economic States the country has ever
seen Britain was spending too much money on their
defenses and imports and wasn't investing enough
in Industry causing jobs to be lost and profits
to fall in the 1960s the relationship between the
unionists and Republicans in Northern Ireland
broke down with conflicts breaking out between
the two factions the unionists wanted to remain
within the United Kingdom while the Republicans
fought for independence as they wanted a
United Ireland in 1969 Britain sent its
Army into Northern Ireland to quell the conflict
which was met with retaliation from the Irish
Republican Army who V silently attacked soldiers
in 1972 14 Irish Catholics were killed during a
March which became known as Bloody Sunday
this only heightened tensions which led to
Britain taking over the control of the Northern
Ireland government while this was only meant to
be for a short period of time it lasted 35 years
Britain tried to share power between the two Irish
factions but the plan failed and violence
broke out once again in 1974 the price of
oil Rose exponentially in the 1970s due to other
countries taking control of their own Industries
which severely affected the British economy this
crisis led to union strikes and the labor party
coming into Power led by Margaret Thatcher
Britain's economy saw massive changes made
messages Mr President the Tor philosophy works
when we have the courage to put it into practice
and the perseverance to see it through not all of
which were met with a positive response following
the moneris theory the government made many cuts
to spending which caused many jobs to be lost
this caused the 1981 riots that saw youth lash
out about poor job prospects and the feeling of
discrimination among the black community in 1982
Argentina took over the faulin which was a British
territory at the time Margaret Thatcher managed
to defeat Argentina over control which boosted her
popularity in the country for a short period of
time by the middle of the 1980s privatization was
in full swing this allowed more British people to
invest in shares which increased profits for the
government zor 23 City Bank around
this time in 1985 the Irish Republic
accepted Ireland as part of the United Kingdom
although conflicts within the country continued
with a new millennium being ushered in and the
digital age taking rot the British Empire came
to an end with many of its territories now given
Independence Britain entered into a union with
Europe to bolster its economy and trade industry
but this split opinions eventually it led to the
2016 brexit where the majority of the British
people chose to leave the union Elizabeth leaves
Westminster the queen is crowned symbol of Hope
Queen Elizabeth rides forth another extraordinary
chapter has been written with the death of Queen
Elizabeth II on September 8th 2022 after reigning
for an incredible 70 years and 214 days the
United Kingdom moved into a brand new era
[Music] in 2023 the country now faces an
energy crisis while continuing its efforts
to deter conflict between Russia and Ukraine
throughout its incredible history the United
Kingdom has made many integral contributions to
the world from industry to culture since World
War II Britain has made a huge impact
on culture literature film television
music and Theater which continues to act as an
inspiration for Many Nations the most significant
contribution however would be the English
language itself which has become a universal
language around the globe which has brought
many cultures economies and Nations together